Add spatial to census schema (#1387)
chanzuckerberg/cellxgene-census: docs/cellxgene_census_schema.md

# CZ CELLxGENE Discover Census Schema

> **Version**: 2.3.0

Reviewer: I don't feel strongly about this - but note that the semver explanation in the census schema mentions "new modality" as a major schema change ...

Major: any schema changes that make the Census incompatible with the Census API or SOMA API. Examples:
Column deletion in Census obs
**Addition of new modality**

Author: I saw that, but I put the emphasis on **incompatible** as the qualifier. We did this in a way that does not break anything. I read the example as having the assumption that adding a new modality would require a breaking change.

Reviewer: That makes sense. Consider this comment resolved then.

> * Can be done at the single-cell level.
> * May include nascent or elongating RNA data.
> * May be targeted to specific genes in an assay-specific manner.
> * May include spatial data only from Visium or Slide-seq.

> > * Doesn’t measure spatial data from other assays,

Reviewer: Editorial.

Editorial. assays, -> assays.

or you could cut line 130 and rewrite line 129 to:

May include spatial data exclusively from Visium or Slide-seq.

130 reads a bit redundant to me.

Author: Made this change in 12a467602b47

These data need to be normalized by gene length for downstream analysis.

##### Spatial Assays

Only observations from Visium and Slide-seq assays MUST be included in Census, as indicated in the list of [accepted assays](./census_accepted_assays.csv).  Per the CELLxGENE dataset schema, datasets with spatial observations can be identified with the presence of the slot `uns["spatial"]`. For these assays, only observations from datasets that contain "one Space Ranger output for a single tissue section" MUST be included in Census.

The full logic above can be asserted as follows:

* If a dataset has the slot `uns["spatial"]` and `True` in `uns["spatial"]["is_single"]`, then all observations MUST be included.
* If a dataset has the slot `uns["spatial"]` and `False` in `uns["spatial"]["is_single"]`, then all observations MUST be excluded.

> 

Reviewer: There is only support for Visium and Slide-seq in the dataset schema, so it's unclear why uns['spatial'] is the identifier versus the actual assay_ontology_term_id?

In addition, the example of "one Space Ranger output" is only specific to Visium. See the language related to pucks for Slide-seq in https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/single-cell-curation/blob/main/schema/5.2.0/schema.md#is_single:

<li> if <code>assay_ontology_term_id</code> is <a href="https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols4/ontologies/efo/classes?obo_id=EFO%3A0010961"><code>"EFO:0010961"</code></a> for <i>Visium Spatial Gene Expression</i> and the dataset represents one Space Ranger output for a single tissue section
      </li>
      <li> if <code>assay_ontology_term_id</code> is <a href="https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols4/ontologies/efo/classes?obo_id=EFO%3A0030062"><code>"EFO:0030062"</code></a> for <i>Slide-seqV2</i> and the dataset represents the output for a single array on a puck </li>
<br>
You could simply reuse this language here?

Author: How about:

Only observations from Visium and Slide-seq assays MUST be included in Census, as indicated in the list of [accepted assays](./census_accepted_assays.csv).  Per the CELLxGENE dataset schema, datasets with spatial observations can be identified with the presence of the slot `uns["spatial"]`. For these assays, observations from datasets that contain more than one tissue section MUST NOT be included in Census.

The full logic above can be asserted as follows:

* if `assay_ontology_term_id` is [`"EFO:0010961"`](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols4/ontologies/efo/classes?obo_id=EFO%3A0010961) for Visium Spatial Gene Expression and the dataset represents one Space Ranger output for a single tissue section (e.g.the dataset has `True` in `uns["spatial"]["is_single"]`)
* if `assay_ontology_term_id` is [`"EFO:0030062"`](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols4/ontologies/efo/classes?obo_id=EFO%3A0030062) for Slide-seqV2 and the dataset represents the output for a single array on a puck (e.g. the dataset has `True` in `uns["spatial"]["is_single"]`)

Reviewer: I think this is fine for the time being. 

This section will require a rewrite when we update the 5.3 EFO changes to Visium - descendant of ["EFO:0010961"](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols4/ontologies/efo/classes?obo_id=EFO%3A0010961) for _Visium Spatial Gene Expression_ so further editorial changes can occur then.

</tbody>
</table>

### Census Spatial Sequencing Data – `census_obj["census_spatial_sequencing"][organism]` – `SOMAExperiment`

> Only Visium and Slide-seq are supported for spatial data. [See the "assays included" section above](assays).

Reviewer: Editorial - more specific assay references.

Spatial data for *Homo sapiens* MUST be stored as a `SOMAExperiment` in `census_obj["census_spatial_sequencing"]["homo_sapiens"]`.

Spatial data for *Mus musculus* MUST be stored as a `SOMAExperiment` in `census_obj["census_spatial_sequencing"]["mus_musculus"]`.

For each organism the `SOMAExperiment` MUST contain the following:

> 

Reviewer: Editorial - I would cut much/all of this section since it summarizes requirements that are stated with more clarity below while requiring reviewers/readers to read information twice in different forms.

For example:

* Obs to spatial data mapping:
  * Obs to spatial data – `census_obj["census_spatial_sequencing"][organism].obs_spatial_presence`. It indicates the link between an observation and a scene, it MUST have three columns: 1) `soma_joinid` corresponding to `soma_joinid` of `obs` and 2) `scene_id` corresponding to the associated scene and 3) `data` which is a boolean value indicating presence.

and then:

#### Obs to spatial mapping –  `census_obj["census_spatial_sequencing"][organism].obs_presence_matrix` – `SOMADataFrame`

It indicates the link between an observation and a scene.  Each row corresponds to an observation with the following columns:

<!-- markdownlint-disable reference-links-images -->
<table>
<thead>
  <tr>
    <th>Column</th>
    <th>Encoding</th>
    <th>Description</th>
  </tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
  <tr>
    <td>soma_joinid</td>
    <td>int</td>
    <td>It MUST be valid <code>soma_joinid</code> from <code>census_obj["census_spatial_sequencing"][organism].obs</code>.</td>
  </tr>
  </tr>
    <td>scene_id</td>
    <td>string</td>
    <td>It MUST be valid <code>scene_id</code> from <code>census_obj["census_spatial_sequencing"][organism].spatial</code>.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>data</td>
    <td>bool</td>
    <td>It MUST be <code>True</code> if the scene contains spatial information about the oberservation, otherwise it MUST be <code>False</code>.</td>
  </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

* Cell metadata – `census_obj["census_spatial_sequencing"][organism].obs` – `SOMADataFrame`
* Non-spatial data  –  `census_obj["census_spatial_sequencing"][organism].ms` – `SOMACollection`. This `SOMACollection` MUST only contain one `SOMAMeasurement` in `census_obj["census_spatial_sequencing"][organism].ms["RNA"]` with the following:
  * Matrix  data –  `census_obj["census_spatial_sequencing"][organism].ms["RNA"].X` – `SOMACollection`. It MUST contain exactly one layers:
    * Count matrix – `census_obj["census_spatial_sequencing"][organism].ms["RNA"].X["raw"]` – `SOMASparseNDArray`
  * Feature metadata – `census_obj["census_spatial_sequencing"][organism].ms["RNA"].var` – `SOMAIndexedDataFrame`
  * Feature dataset presence matrix – `census_obj["census_spatial_sequencing"][organism].ms["RNA"]["feature_dataset_presence_matrix"]` – `SOMASparseNDArray`
* Obs to spatial data mapping:
  * Obs to spatial data – `census_obj["census_spatial_sequencing"][organism].obs_spatial_presence` – `SOMADataFrame`
* Spatial data  –  `census_obj["census_spatial_sequencing"][organism].spatial` – `SOMACollection`.

>   * Spatial Scenes with spatial data  –  `census_obj["census_spatial_sequencing"][organism].spatial[scene_id]`  – `SOMAScene`.  There will be as many as Spatial Scenes as  spatial datasets. Each`SOMAScene` MUST contain the following:

Reviewer 2: I am not familiar with the term "scene". Is this commonly used? Or else would be nice if it was defined in "Definitions" section of this document.

Author: I am having trouble finding a concise definition, but I believe it's a common term in computer graphics. There a scene would be the entire thing being rendered. E.g. a scene graph is a tree representation of all the objects to render.

In the SOMA specification, this is defined as:

> SOMAScene: a specialization and extension of SOMACollection that stores spatially resolved data that can be registered to a single coordinate space.

So I could do:

> scene: a collection of spatially resolved data that can be registered to a single coordinate space

?

Reviewer 2: I see, yes, that definition looks good to me. Thanks!

>     * MUST contain a positions array – `census_obj["census_spatial_sequencing"][organism].spatial[scene_id].obsl["loc"]` – `PointCloudDataFrame`. This will contain the spatial array positions for each observation, the geometry points associated to them, and additional metadata.

Reviewer: Editorial - This contains the spatial array positions for each observation, their associated geometry points, and additional metadata.

>     * MUST contain a positions array – `census_obj["census_spatial_sequencing"][organism].spatial[scene_id].obsl["loc"]` – `PointCloudDataFrame`. This will contain the spatial array positions for each observation, the geometry points associated to them, and additional metadata.

Reviewer: RE `PointCloudDataFrame` - should this be `SOMAPointCloudDataFrame`

    * MUST contain a high resolution image  – `census_obj["census_spatial_sequencing"][organism].spatial[scene_id].img[library_id]["highres_image"]` – `MultiscaleImage`.

#### Matrix Data, count (raw) matrix – `census_obj["census_spatial_sequencing"][organism].ms["RNA"].X["raw"]` – `SOMASparseNDArray`

> Same as non-spatial data. See the corresponding section [here](#matrix-data-count-raw-matrix--census_objcensus_dataorganismmsrnaxraw--somasparsendarray).

Reviewer: Editorial. For all the "Same as non-spatial data" with [here] as the link, I might rewrite to this template:

```
Spatial and non-spatial data share the [same requirements](#matrix-data-count-raw-matrix--census_objcensus_dataorganismmsrnaxraw--somasparsendarray).

```

  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>array_row</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>in_tissue</td>
  </tr>
</tbody>
</table>

#### Obs to spatial mapping –  `census_obj["census_spatial_sequencing"][organism].obs_presence_matrix` – `SOMADataFrame`

It indicates the link between an observation and a scene.  Each row corresponds to an observation with the following columns:

<!-- markdownlint-disable reference-links-images -->
<table>
<thead>
  <tr>
    <th>Column</th>
    <th>Encoding</th>
    <th>Description</th>
  </tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
  <tr>
    <td>soma_joinid</td>
    <td>int</td>
    <td>It MUST be valid <code>soma_joinid</code> from <code>census_obj["census_spatial_sequencing"][organism].obs</code>.</td>
  </tr>
  </tr>
    <td>scene_id</td>
    <td>string</td>
    <td>It MUST be valid <code>scene_id</code> from <code>census_obj["census_spatial_sequencing"][organism].spatial</code>.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>data</td>
    <td>bool</td>
    <td>It MUST be <code>True</code> if the scene contains spatial information about the oberservation, otherwise it MUST be <code>False</code>.</td>
  </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>
<!-- markdownlint-enable reference-links-images -->

> #### Positions array of a Scene – `census_obj["census_spatial_sequencing"][organism].spatial[scene_id].obsl["loc"]` – `PointCloudDataFrame`

Reviewer: RE `PointCloudDataFrame` - should this be `SOMAPointCloudDataFrame`

Author: Ah, looks like it's from the SOMA spec

Reviewer: That's where I discovered it. May be helpful to have links to the SOMA specification for readers/reviewers where appropriate.

`scene_id` MUST correspond to the values `scene_id` in `census_obj["census_spatial_sequencing"][organism].obs_presence_matrix`.

For each observation in each Scene, spatial array positions and additional positional metadata MUST be encoded as a `PointCloudDataFrame`.  Each row corresponds to an observation with the following columns:

<!-- markdownlint-disable reference-links-images -->
<table>
<thead>
  <tr>
    <th>Column</th>
    <th>Encoding</th>
    <th>Description</th>
  </tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
  <tr>
    <td>x</td>
    <td>float</td>
    <td>It MUST be the corresponding value in the <b>first</b> column of <code>obsm["spatial"]</code>. As defined in the CELLxGENE dataset schema.</td>
  </tr>
  </tr>
    <td>y</td>
    <td>float</td>
    <td>It MUST be the corresponding value in the <b>second</b> column of <code>obsm["spatial"]</code>. As defined in the CELLxGENE dataset schema.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>soma_joinid</td>
    <td>integer</td>
    <td>It MUST be valid <code>soma_joinid</code> from <code>census_obj["census_spatial_sequencing"][organism].obs</code>.</td>
  </tr>
  </tr>
  </tr>
 </tbody>
</table>
<!-- markdownlint-enable reference-links-images -->

> If Visium ("EFO:0010961") the units for the spatial array positions are pixels from the high-resolution image (`spatial[scene_soma_joinid].img[library_id]`). Otherwise TBD.

Reviewer: "TBD" ? I think this needs to be more specific for this version.

Reviewer 2: It is my understanding that the x,y positions are pixels from the full resolution image.

Author: I would still be inclined to just not specify here, since we don't specify anything about this in the cellxgene specification. E.g. I don't think we would say it's invalid if the submitted positions had been converted to µm.

Reviewer 2: Making sure I am understanding you correctly. Are you saying that you want to omit the entire line 1017? FYI, the X and Y coordinates are based off of the [tissue_positions.csv](https://www.10xgenomics.com/support/software/space-ranger/3.0/analysis/spatial-outputs#tissue-positions) file (which are in relation to the full res image) are used in adata.obsm['spatial'], per CxG schema 5.3. 

I'm not sure I am fully understanding what the statement is saying. Have the units for the positions been scaled to the high res image?

Author: Ah, no. I think we should keep what is said about Visium. I would like to not have any statement about what units are used for Slide-seq

Author: > Have the units for the positions been scaled to the high res image?

Ah, also no. Good catch. We store a scaling transformation from the fullres pixel space to the hires pixel space. So this should say:

```suggestion
If Visium ("EFO:0010961") the units for the spatial array positions are pixels from the full-resolution image.
```

Though we could also just say something more like: "these are the coordinates from `.obsm["spatial"]` as defined in the cellxgene schema".

Reviewer 2: Yes, either would work. Both makes sense to me. Thanks!
On a side note, is there a particular reason the full res image is not accessible from the census?

Author: > On a side note, is there a particular reason the full res image is not accessible from the census?

When we were prototyping we had some issues around alignment of the full res image and the hires image not being consistent across datasets.

Reviewer 2: Oh! I didn't realize there were alignment issues with some of the images. 
> not being consistent across datasets.

Not entirely sure I know what this means, but happy to help to see if it was a curation issue when we were wrangling the full resolution image. FWIW, there has been feedback that the full resolution image is much more useful in computational and pathology analyses. Can discuss offline if you would like.

The location dataframe MUST have the metadata fields:

<!-- markdownlint-disable reference-links-images -->
<table>
<thead>
  <tr>
    <th>Key</th>
    <th>Encoding</th>
    <th>Description</th>
  </tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
  <tr>
    <td>soma_geometry_type</td>
    <td>str</td>
    <td>MUST be "radius"</td>
  </tr>
  </tr>
    <td>soma_geometry</td>
    <td>float</td>

>     <td>Radius of points: <code>dimeter/2</code>. If Visium ("EFO:0010961") <code>diameter</code> MUST be <code>.uns["spatial"][library_id]['spot_diameter_fullres']</code>.  As defined in the CELLxGENE dataset schema. Otherwise TBD-TODO (else for Slide-seq it should be  0.003% of the radius occupied by the full cloud of points).</td>

Reviewer 2: is `Radius of points` a value that is applicable Slide-seq? It makes sense for Visium because each spot is 55 µm in diameter and contains multiple cells. For Slide-seq, the full "cloud of points" is not consistent from array to array. For example, this [dataset](https://cellxgene.cziscience.com/e/90ef2377-e4d0-41c7-924f-6f9ee7a9237d.cxg/) is not round. If applied to Slide-seq, I would say it most closely resembles the resolution. I'll research some more, if this is something of interest.

>     <td>Radius of points: <code>dimeter/2</code>. If Visium ("EFO:0010961") <code>diameter</code> MUST be <code>.uns["spatial"][library_id]['spot_diameter_fullres']</code>.  As defined in the CELLxGENE dataset schema. Otherwise TBD-TODO (else for Slide-seq it should be  0.003% of the radius occupied by the full cloud of points).</td>

Author: I believe that it's more of a technical artifact that we are providing a radius here. I do think it's important to make clear that the radius we are setting for slide-seq points is arbitrary, while the visium radius is something based on the actual physical assay.

>     <td>Radius of points: <code>dimeter/2</code>. If Visium ("EFO:0010961") <code>diameter</code> MUST be <code>.uns["spatial"][library_id]['spot_diameter_fullres']</code>.  As defined in the CELLxGENE dataset schema. Otherwise TBD-TODO (else for Slide-seq it should be  0.003% of the radius occupied by the full cloud of points).</td>

Reviewer: For this version, I would document the context / current implementation for Slide-Seq. 

BTW, I looked at Seurat which is also a _small constant_:

**Get Spot Radius**

```
Radius.SlideSeq <- function(object, ...) {
  return(0.005)
}
```

Editorial - <code>dimeter/2</code> -> diameter

Per @jychien's assessment and future schemas, was there a discussion whether it was applicable? Perhaps a question for the CB UXR in Q2?

>     <td>Radius of points: <code>dimeter/2</code>. If Visium ("EFO:0010961") <code>diameter</code> MUST be <code>.uns["spatial"][library_id]['spot_diameter_fullres']</code>.  As defined in the CELLxGENE dataset schema. Otherwise TBD-TODO (else for Slide-seq it should be  0.003% of the radius occupied by the full cloud of points).</td>

Reviewer 2: I think it would be helpful to have a high level definition of what information `soma_geometry` or `Radius of points` is trying to capture. 

- Is this the number of pixels?
- spot_diameter_fullres refers to the number of pixes that span the diameter of the spot in the full resolution image. Is the full resolution image being made available?
- Or has this been scaled from the full res image to fit the high res? 
- The beads for Slide-seq are 10-μm. And there is no images for this assay. It's still unclear to me as to how 'Radius of points' would be defined for Slide-seq.

>     <td>Radius of points: <code>dimeter/2</code>. If Visium ("EFO:0010961") <code>diameter</code> MUST be <code>.uns["spatial"][library_id]['spot_diameter_fullres']</code>.  As defined in the CELLxGENE dataset schema. Otherwise TBD-TODO (else for Slide-seq it should be  0.003% of the radius occupied by the full cloud of points).</td>

Author: @jychien

> Is this the number of pixels?

Radius is defined in the same units as the positions.

> Or has this been scaled from the full res image to fit the high res?

There is a scaling transformation for how to translate between fullres pixel space and hires pixel space. That is used to allow for plotting of locations on top of the image.

> The beads for Slide-seq are 10-μm. And there is no images for this assay. It's still unclear to me as to how 'Radius of points' would be defined for Slide-seq.

I believe the choice of radius for slide seq was arbitrary based on it being a reasonably good size for plotting. The specific value as is right now was chosen before I joined CZI, so I can't tell you much more than that.

----

Updated with typo fix:

```suggestion
    <td>Radius of points: <code>diameter/2</code>. If Visium ("EFO:0010961") <code>diameter</code> MUST be <code>.uns["spatial"][library_id]['spot_diameter_fullres']</code>, as defined in the CELLxGENE dataset schema. For Slide-seqV2 the radius is a small constant.</td>
```

>     <td>Radius of points: <code>dimeter/2</code>. If Visium ("EFO:0010961") <code>diameter</code> MUST be <code>.uns["spatial"][library_id]['spot_diameter_fullres']</code>.  As defined in the CELLxGENE dataset schema. Otherwise TBD-TODO (else for Slide-seq it should be  0.003% of the radius occupied by the full cloud of points).</td>

Reviewer 2: Ah, I see. Very much appreciate you taking the time to answer all my questions, and sounds like it is there to help inform plotting of size of dots. The final suggestion looks good to me.

>     <td>Radius of points: <code>dimeter/2</code>. If Visium ("EFO:0010961") <code>diameter</code> MUST be <code>.uns["spatial"][library_id]['spot_diameter_fullres']</code>.  As defined in the CELLxGENE dataset schema. Otherwise TBD-TODO (else for Slide-seq it should be  0.003% of the radius occupied by the full cloud of points).</td>

Reviewer 3: Thank you for the great discussion. @ivirshup I have a question for the slide-seq v2 data downloaded from the API: What is the unit of geometry points (GeometryArray, storing their locations)? Is it also μm?

>     <td>Radius of points: <code>dimeter/2</code>. If Visium ("EFO:0010961") <code>diameter</code> MUST be <code>.uns["spatial"][library_id]['spot_diameter_fullres']</code>.  As defined in the CELLxGENE dataset schema. Otherwise TBD-TODO (else for Slide-seq it should be  0.003% of the radius occupied by the full cloud of points).</td>

Reviewer 3: @jychien and also apologize for bothering you. Just in case you by chance know this piece of information of the above question.

  </tr>
 </tbody>
</table>
<!-- markdownlint-enable reference-links-images -->

#### Images of a Scene - `census_obj["census_spatial_sequencing"][organism].spatial[scene_soma_joinid].img[library_id]` – `Collection` of `MultiscaleImage`

> Images of a Visium ("EFO:0010961") scene MUST adhere to the following specifications. Other assays MUST NOT have images, and MUST NOT include the `img` collection.

Reviewer: You should be able to rely on / reuse the dataset schema requirement for uns.spatial[library_id] which guarantees that census builder receives validated data. For schema 5.2.0:

_Curator MUST annotate if assay_ontology_term_id is "EFO:0010961" for Visium Spatial Gene Expression and uns['spatial']['is_single'] is True; otherwise, this key MUST NOT be present._

So you could write:

This MUST only be present when there is a corresponding value in the source H5AD slot `.uns["spatial"][library_id]`, as defined in the CELLxGENE dataset schema.

Author: It's a little different here since we are not including the full resolution image that might be present in the original h5ad.

`library_id` MUST be the corresponding value in the source H5AD slot `.uns["spatial"][library_id]`, as defined in the CELLxGENE dataset schema.

##### High resolution image of a Scene  – `census_obj["census_spatial_sequencing"][organism].spatial[scene_soma_joinid].img[library_id]["highres_image"]` – `MultiscaleImage`

> The high resolution image of a Visium ("EFO:0010961") scene MUST be included and MUST be encoded as a `SOMAImageNDArray`.

Reviewer: If you're going to use this style - Visium ("EFO:0010961") - to reference to assays, then I'd recommend using the correct label - Visium Spatial Gene Expression.

Author: Just to clarify, would you like me to change `Visium ("EFO:0010961")` to `Visium Spatial Gene Expression` or `Visium Spatial Gene Expression ("EFO:0010961")`?

Reviewer: Visium Spatial Gene Expression ("EFO:0010961") or "EFO:0010961" for _Visium Spatial Gene Expression_
